intro to statistical concepts (#111)
nfidd/nfidd: sessions/slides/introduction-to-statistical-concepts.qmd

---
title: "Introduction to statistical concepts used in the course"
author: "Nowcasting and forecasting of infectious disease dynamics"
format:
  revealjs:
    output: slides/introduction-to-statistical-concepts.html
    footer: "Introduction to statistical concepts used in the course"
    slide-level: 3
---

```{r echo = FALSE, message = FALSE}
library("ggplot2")
set.seed(123)
```

### Why statistical concepts?

- We'll need to estimate things (delays, reproduction numbers, case numbers now and in the future)

- We'll want to correctly specify uncertainty

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- We'll want to incorporate our domain expertise

```

1. Calculate the probability
2. **Randomly sample**

## Bayesian inference in 15 minutes {.smaller}

![](figures/bayesian_model_without_distributions.png)

Idea of Bayesian inference: treat $\theta$ as **random variables** (with a probability distribution) and **condition on data**: posterior probability $p(\theta | \mathrm{data})$ as target of inference.

### Bayes' rule {.smaller}

- We treat the parameters of the a $\theta$ as random with *prior probabilities* given by a distribution $p(\theta)$. Confronting the model with data we obtain *posterior probabilities*  $p(\theta | \mathrm{data})$, our target of inference. Applying the rule of conditional probabilities, we can write this as

$$ p(\theta | \textrm{data}) = \frac{p(\textrm{data} | \theta) p(\theta)}{p(\textrm{data})}$$

- $p(\textrm{data} | \theta)$ is the /likelihood/
- $p(\textrm{data})$ is a /normalisation constant/

- In words,
  $$\textrm{(posterior)} \propto \textrm{(normalised likelihood)} \times \textrm{(prior)}$$

### Bayesian inference

![](figures/bayesian_model.png)

### MCMC

- Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a method to generate *samples* from the *posterior distribution*, the **target** of inference

> - [stan](https://mc-stan.org/) is a statistical software that implements MCMC samplers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [stan](https://mc-stan.org/) is a probabilistic programming language that helps you to write down probabilistic models and to fit the using MCMC samplers and other methods.
```
